[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SEEDS FALLING]
[FOOT STEPS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I first came here, we
were a hippie, back to nature,
a self-sufficient thing.
We were watching too many Davy
Crockett Daniel Boone movies
and reading too much Thoreau.
We were trying to seek
a different vision.
The first time I
saw bean collections
and so on, it was like,
woo, a jewelry store.
I lit up and I've always just
been dazzled by diversity.
I don't like people that
are all straight, all gay,
all communist, all Christian.
Let them all be
there and absolutely
the different kinds of seeds.
My great-grandfather
was a farmer.
Looking through our
family photo album,
I just wish that I could
somehow step into that photo,
say, hi, great-grandma.
That's me, Billy.
And can I have some of these?
Because I know for a fact
that 90 something percent
of the things are now extinct.
They're my family.
And they're gone.
I had this horrible
vision someday
that the Creator would look
down and he'd come look around
and say, well, where is this?
Well, where did that go?
I created this.
Where did it go?
How come it's not here?
I see myself as Noah, not God.
Noah didn't get to decide
whether the crocodiles came
on the Ark or not
or the black flies.
His job was to load them on.
OK?
That's my job.
I have thousands of varieties
that I'm maintaining.
People of the future, plant
breeders and gardeners,
they will decide, what the
heck did Will save that for?
I don't get to
make that decision.
My job is to keep
these all on the Ark,
keep them alive for
40 days and 40 nights
until the flood's over.
I may discover 10 years
from now that that seed will
be in huge demand because
it has in its genes
some resistance to some disease
which is only now evolving.
In many, many
cases what I've got
is not available anywhere else.
>> It's my sweetheart.
>> The year that I fail to grow
a variety is the year it is
lost to me and, in some cases,
perhaps lost to the planet.
Some of these things are right
on the edge of extinction.
We have this collection of
several potato varieties,
potatoes that are
purple or black of skin
with yellow flesh,
some with purple skin,
hot pink streaks in them.
We have in the collection
a variety of lumpers.
Most of the Irish in the 1830s
and '40s were growing lumpers.
Big yielder.
And none of those varieties
have had any resistance
to late blight.
This is the potato that killed
a million Irishmen, because
of the fact that they are the
one or two or three varieties
that were totally vulnerable.
This is the variety
that explains
why O is the biggest section
of the South Boston phone
directory.
Genetic diversity is the hedge
between us and global famine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The diversity in our
seed stocks is as endangered
as a panda or a golden eagle
or a polar bear right now.
We have the largest seed
shortage in history.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's this beautiful
dance between the plant
and the humans that find
each other and make a culture
possible.
In Mesoamerica, over 10,000
years ago, corn found humans,
and humans found corn.
>> Corn really is this beautiful
co-creation between plants
and humans.
The domestication of corn was
centered in the Oaxacan Valley
of Mexico.
The incredible evolutionary
leaps that we took with corn
is a miracle.
It ignited the sacred connection
that we had with seeds.
Corn seeds moved along the
entire spine of the Americas.
It became this revolution.
It became this new way of
being able to feed ourselves.
>> It's what fueled you from
a small tribe to an empire.
Spies and traitors
and anyone who
was around and saw what it
was doing grabbed a handful
and took off.
It took 4,700 years to
get it to the US border.
Then about 1,000 years
ago, corn is everywhere
in what we now call
the United States.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Corn becomes so elastic and
adaptive that now we see corn
being grown on every continent.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As keepers of the corn,
the corn has come up with us
through our migrations,
sustaining us.
Our first mothers were the
Blue Corn and White Corn Woman.
This is my grandmother, my
grandfather, my mom, my dad,
my brother, my sister, my
kids, my grandkids, and myself.
We all are one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My father said, "Son, never,
never let go of the corn.
When I pass on, carry
on the way of the corn."
I've always been a farmer
all my life, from the day
that I can remember I was out
there with my grandparents,
my uncles, and my father.
The spiritual people
gave us the corn.
They say when the
corn hears you,
then they start dancing with
you with the leaves fluttering.
Crow damage, but we
still bring it in.
Everything is brought in.
People are too attracted
to the big and beautiful.
But the Hopi women and men say
that even this little one here
is special, because
every corn seed has life.
Everything is special.
And I'll plant these.
>> Yeah.
>> I'll plant this.
We don't throw them away.
>> Wow.
>> We take care of them.
In the womb, human
people are seeds.
We see the seeds being planted
into the womb of the Mother
Earth.
They may be calling me
daddy and say, daddy,
I'm glad I'm here
with you, you know,
because these are my children.
>> Indian people, we
talk in one language,
the language of these seeds.
And the most important
thing in my heart,
it's taking seeds
anywhere I can go.
And my grandfather
tell me one time,
"This is very
important for life."
He told me before he died.
Before he died he poured me
full of the seeds in my hand
and he said, "This is life.
And put it always
in your pocket,
because if you look up seeds
in your pocket, you can walk
or you can eat these seeds.
If you have money, you
cannot eat the money."
This is gold.
Seeds, they are
our own medicine.
When we have to eat, we give
a little bit to the Earth.
I am working for now for several
years in the Tesuque Pueblo.
We lost our seeds.
We lost our food.
But when you lose
in the seeds, you're
losing completely your
traditional ways of eating.
I bring some of the crops
to these Pueblo people,
quinoa, amaranth, the
lost crop of the Incas.
It's part of this prophecy, the
condor and the eagle exchanging
seeds, exchanging knowledge.
In all these bags you see, we
have different type of seeds.
This trailer there not one seed.
Seven years we fill up with
our work, with our sweat.
And this is food for the future.
These seeds, they
are not very happy
because they are one on
top of the other one.
They are beginning to tell us we
need a new house, a place where
they can have a home like us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Native Seeds/SEARCH
is a seed bank.
Most of the seeds came to
us through Native Americans.
As modern creatures,
we're in debt to them.
They are the last expression
of these stewards going back
thousands of years that
took care of these things
and made sure that we got them.
>> I had somebody the other
day call this Fort Knox.
There's just so
much wealth in here.
It's about 2,000
different varieties
of invaluable
agricultural crops.
All 38 generations,
all this energy
comes down into the seed.
You get to hold it.
And then all the future and the
millions more that can come out
goes out.
And you're at that
point when you
hold those seeds in your hands.
Right here is the mother corn.
This is the ancient ancestor
from which all corn came.
And that's what we're losing.
I mean we just don't
have the time left again
on this small planet to
recreate all this stuff.
That's why it's so invaluable.
Once it's gone, it's gone.
Seeds are living embryos.
They do have a lifespan.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We try to grow everything
out every 10 years.
That's why we have
the 60-acre farm here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are hugely vulnerable
with all of those seeds.
You think about crimes against
humanity, blow up a seed bank
and it becomes an immediate
target to weaken a country.
>> When we invaded Iraq, we
destroyed that seed bank.
And we destroyed that garden.
And we destroyed that repository
of the great ancient seeds
that had been collected
by that government
for the benefit of mankind.
[GUNFIRE]
>> During World War II, Hitler
was aiming to conquer Nikolai
Vavilov's Seed Bank
in St. Petersburg.
And the people associated with
that seed bank holed themselves
up in the building and
kept those seeds protected,
even though they were starving
to death and missiles and bombs
were landing all around them.
[EXPLOSIONS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I remember gardening
with these little hands.
Now, they have gardens of their
own and children of their own.
If there's no one to pass that
seed on to that living link
and that living seed is lost.
These are Grandpa Ott's
morning glories, the seed that
started the whole movement.
When we started Seed
Savers in the '70s,
we didn't have anything.
We just had an idea and a dream.
So we had thousands of
beans in my living room.
It was now our responsibility
to keep all those bean
varieties alive.
What we've saved over those
years is irreplaceable.
And if we hadn't started then,
we would have lost a lot more.
It's always amazing to
me when we started out
with two varieties
of seed and now I'm
here looking at over
24,000 accessions of seed
that we're permanently
maintaining at the Seed
Vault. All of our seeds
are in airtight foil packs.
So they're not
maintaining any moisture.
We also store a backup
collection at the Seed
Vault off the coast
of Norway at Svalbard.
>> Svalbard has been called
the doomsday seed vault.
The idea is that if one of
these asteroids hits and causes
a tsunami that wipes
out a part of the world
or there's catastrophic
cultural and economic collapse,
you know, we see all the seed
banks in the world looted just
for food.
The idea was to have a backup,
like the ultimate backup,
just in case the seed
bank is destroyed
and they need their seeds back.
But the problem
with it is that we
think that we don't have
to worry about this now.
It gives a false
sense of security.
>> All the gene banks,
they are all arks.
Ultimately, life does
not go on in an ark.
I'm not confident that any of
us have got something long term
in place that can
weather the slings
and arrows of outrageous
fortune that may come our way.
[RUMBLING]
[HOWLING WIND]
>> We're now facing
severity of climate change,
the most radical we've had
since the last ice age.
This is happening at
an unprecedented rate.
And it's putting pressure on
the diversity of life forms.
>> You know, this is the driest
they've seen since 119 years--
>> The Golden State's drought,
the worst in over 1,000 years.
[FOOT STEPS]
>> In northern New Mexico, we
had a series of drier and drier
years.
Normally, this time
of the year, we're
going to get ready for planting.
But where there's
not any moisture,
usually you'll hit a wet spot.
A lot of the animals
begin to feel
the effects of the drought.
They consume probably
about a third of our corn
and all of our beans.
So it's tough for everybody.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our corn is among the few
places that is environmentally
adapted to drought.
The Hopi grow corn
with no irrigation.
All of our ceremonies
are for rain.
You petition the clouds
to come and bless us.
We say in our prayers,
"May the Cloud People come.
May the Kachina People come and
visit us and bring this rain.
May the corn grow up and
produce their young ones."
You never lose faith
in the Cloud People.
This is a way that my
prayers have been answered.
One day our corn will
become very, very valuable
to human survival.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was very, very
fortunate when I was a child.
It was a fantastic tree.
My tree began from
a tiny little seed.
And I spent hours and hours up
in the branches of that tree.
And how magic that it could
actually grow into a big tree.
That tree is still
in the garden today.
Seeds are so crafty.
There is a power.
It's a magic.
To me, it's magic.
It's a life force so strong.
There are seeds
that rely on fire.
There are seeds that tangle
up in the hair of an animal.
They get carried for miles.
There are seeds that can't
germinate unless they pass
through the gut of an animal.
Darwin was amazed that a
seed grew after it had been
21 hours in the stomach an owl.
>> The seed is a doorway between
the life of the old plant
and its gift to the new plant.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our teachers are the plants.
And they're teaching
us that they
have to sacrifice
themselves in order
to be able to give something
to the next generation.
It's a form of reincarnation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[KNOCKING]
>> Come on in.
Hello.
Welcome.
>> Oh, my gosh.
Oh, my gosh, this is amazing.
>> Check it out Check it out.
This is how we roll.
That's why they call me--
>> How do you turn
this damn thing on?
>> They call me the Corn Hippie.
>> Guys, this is unbelievable.
>> There's so much corn here.
I mean, right here in
these bags right here,
this one has 87 different kinds
of corn from Urubama Valley.
>> Oh, my gosh.
>> This is from
the sacred valley.
It's get certified
with a phytosanitary
from the Peruvian government.
And once we get it
certified, then we're
ready to ship it
wherever we want to it.
>> That's astounding.
>> Look through these.
>> Look at that fava.
>> For all the crazy people
like me who sit there at night
and look at bags of beans,
it leaves us a mystery.
>> This is so precious.
No one even has an idea how
much this-- they're like jewels.
They look like polished agates.
Look at this one.
>> Must be artistic genius
of nature that allows this
to happen.
>> I got to sleep with this one.
>> When I was six years old, my
parents asked me what I wanted
for my birthday.
And I said, I want squash.
I didn't want a GI Joe.
And I didn't want
a baseball bat.
I wanted squash.
And I wanted those because
I wanted to save the seeds
and grow 'em.
My seeds are my kitchen table.
My seeds are my way of
sharing food with people
all over the world.
I've been to over 100
countries collecting thousands
and thousands of seeds.
Here from Bolivia looking
like a speckled Robin's egg.
This bean here from Tanzania.
One that's coming from Zimbabwe.
Variety raised by the
West Virginia hillbillies.
Exquisitely sculptured
seed of a tricosanthes
gourd from Vietnam.
The seed is a time capsule.
It's preserving
things from the past.
But it's also bringing
things for the future.
>> And this is--
>> I feel I have an
obligation to the world,
whether that's
unbalanced or not,
to bring this appreciation
to as big a swath of humanity
as possible.
>> This tiny little skinny tree
with really large leaves is
in the cacao family, same
plants that produce chocolate.
And this is just a
distant relative of cacao
that still hasn't
been commercialized.
>> What if there's all kinds of
other seeds in nature that have
the potential for
food production?
>> Way down there.
Feel the end of it?
>> Yeah.
>> Can you hold them?
>> This is what
we just harvested?
>> These have been known to
maybe make grown men scream.
They say you can have a fever
for several days if they bite.
>> Where is it, right here?
OK, this is called Pietrina.
And it's for being
used on cuts and sores.
And it almost has
the look of iodine.
>> There's about 300,000
species of plants on the planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We come down to 30,000
different edible plants.
>> Just kind of suck on them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> 120 are use on a
really regular basis.
And most of humanity subsist on
a mere 10, beans, corn, wheat,
barley, and rice.
Virtually nothing compared
to the bigger picture.
We should put
particular attention
to the seeds of wild
plants and figure out
how we can get those into
cultivation, because they're
part of the biodiversity
heritage that
will feed the world.
>> Pick them out
of there, Patrick.
>> This is a good one.
>> We're getting a meal on a
wild plant here, dali dali,
which is one of the finest
roots in the world to eat.
Top chefs would go
crazy over dali dali.
>> So why don't we grow more?
>> Back in 1700s, Thomas
Jefferson wanted to get seeds
of risotto rice.
And was thanks to
slyness that he
was able to carry out some
of this contraband seed
and raise it near
Monticello in the new world.
>> To feed this expanding
continent that immigrants were
streaming into, we needed a
diversification of food crops.
In the 1890s, of over a
billion packets of seed
were distributed for free to
farmers around the country.
The American Seed
Trade Association
hired the very first lobbyist to
stop the federal seed giveaway,
as they called it.
They saw seed as a
commodity, something
to be quantified, measured,
bought, sold, and traded
on stock markets, just a
number on a spreadsheet.
By 1924, the federal government
seed program would cease.
>> These great industrial said
the only way we can really make
profit on American agriculture
is to invent a seed that they
can't save.
>> And that gave birth to
the hybrid seed industry.
Hybrids were bigger and
better, produces more.
Success is yield.
Hybrid companies
fueled that fever
to get the biggest and the best.
Corn contest was rampant
throughout the Midwest.
You were measured not by how
many times you went to church.
It was how good a corn you grew.
Everybody was winning
that had hybrid corn.
If you save the seeds from
a hybrid and planted again,
you get what I call
Mr. Toad's Wild ride.
Recessive genes that were
hidden in the parents
express themselves again.
This is like the grandparents.
The grandkids started coming out
with all sorts of weird traits.
>> A little more like the mom,
a little more like the dad,
a little like Uncle Harry.
Farmers took it for granted that
we go to a shelf in the store
to buy our seeds.
A profound change, because seed
is the beginning of all of it.
If you're relying on
someone else for you seed
that's like you relying for
someone else on your soul
or something.
This is where it all starts.
To not control that part
of it is a major abdication
of control and responsibility.
And yet, we did it wholesale.
>> It destroyed the natural seed
banks and the seed practices
of the farmers.
Hybrid corn was the atom
bomb of agriculture.
>> Right after the
Second World War,
the Green Revolution
starts in Mexico.
When you hear about
the Green Revolution,
people sometimes
think, well, you know,
that's about windmills
and tofu powered sandals
or whatever it is.
The green in the
Green Revolution
was never about
environmental consciousness.
The green was meant to be the
opposite of a red revolution.
The visions of the
Rockefeller Foundation
kicked off the Green Revolution
to provide cheap food,
so that people would
remain capitalist
and would not riot
and become communist.
This is about
developing kinds of seed
that matter for large scale
commercial farmers wherever
they are.
The Green Revolution was taking
this rich knowledge of peasant
farming that evolve
over millennia
and tossing it into
the dustbin of history,
replacing it with modern
industrial agriculture.
All of a sudden,
men in white coats
become the champions and the
sole arbiters of knowledge
about seeds globally.
>> Seeds of the
Green Revolution,
what are called the
miracle varieties,
they were bred for
taking on more chemicals.
The hungry industry
of war chemicals
wanted to deploy these
chemicals as agri-chemicals,
trying to push chemicals
into agriculture.
>> 90% of the seed that we
use to grow our food is owned
by chemical companies, by
pesticide and pharmaceutical
companies.
Now there's a huge
conflict of interest.
When the chemical
companies own the seeds,
they not only want you
dependent on the seed as farmer,
but they also want you
dependent on their chemicals.
We use 80 million pounds a year
of atrazine just in the US.
Atrazine demasculinizing
frogs and fish.
It can completely cause males
to develop in the females.
Atrazine leads to
promoting breast cancer.
It's associated with
miscarriages and birth defects.
We should have learned this
lesson way back with DDT.
And we're just learning it
over and over and over and over
and over again.
The big concerns are
cancers that pesticides
are associated with.
My whole entry into this
area was because of atrazine.
The actual manufacturer
hired me to look atrazine.
Novartis told me I couldn't talk
to people about my research.
I couldn't publish it
and I couldn't write it.
And I thought, what do you mean?
Then they started trying
to manipulate data.
And that's when I realized
I've helped the chemical
industry keep this chemical in
the market that I know is bad
and go home to my wife and kids,
oh, guess what I did today?
I did a study that
confused all the sciences.
So now people don't know
that this chemical is bad.
Novartis and Syngenta
spent millions fighting me.
When you look at Novartis
and Syngenta's strategy,
the first thing they
say is discredit Hayes.
When he couldn't prove
my science was bad,
they wrote down a
checklist of things
they were going to do to
me, to hurt my students,
to investigate my wife.
And they actually wrote it down.
The first page in the
secret spy evil handbook
is don't write it
down, or you eat
it, or self-destruct, right?
I do everything that I can
in a position that I'm in.
Or you know what some of the
dangers are being an academic
and speaking out
for what's right.
We all have to do it.
[WAVES CRASHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We live in the most
self-sustainable place
on Earth.
We can grow any plant
from Kakela to Hanalei.
It's such a cycle
of life around here
with the ocean and the land.
Hawaiians knew from the
beginning of time our whole
world revolves around aloha
a'ina, giving back to the land,
because the land gives to us.
>> Native Hawaiians had this
incredible agricultural system,
able to sustain three
times today's population.
In the 1800s, plantation
agriculture happened in Hawaii.
And what you see is private land
ownership happening in Hawaii.
The original missionary
families are still
the primary private land owners.
The descendants of the
original missionaries
open up the first
sugar cane plantations.
The last sugar cane mill
closed down eight years ago.
And in its place, biotech
chemical seed companies
came in and took
over agriculture.
They say sugar ruled.
Hawaii sugar was king.
Well, now I would say,
the biotech industry,
these chemical corporations
are king in Hawaii.
[SINGING]
>> I live in a community
that consists of pure native
Hawaiian native speakers.
I've waited for an opportunity
to own my own home.
And not just own my own home,
but a space as a single mother
to raise my children.
Many Hawaiians die waiting
for their opportunity
at a Hawaiian homestead.
I moved out here at the time
sugar was just moving out
and the fields around
us were fallow.
I started to see
different fields pop up
that I've never seen before.
It alarmed me.
I had no idea what
was happening,
what was taking
the place of sugar.
Then I started to experience
very bad allergies, migraines,
and illnesses, just not
being able to get over colds.
My doctor said, oh, you have
full-blown adult asthma.
When I started to see that
the farmers were spraying
pesticides, they are
spraying things at night
while we're sleeping.
My two daughters wake up
with blood soaked pillows.
There's hundreds and hundreds
of acres where these chemical
corporations test their seed.
18 tons of restricted pesticides
being dumped right next
to schools and neighborhoods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm a teacher Waimea Canyon
Middle School for the past 18
years.
There's ag lands
adjacent our campus.
It is literally hundreds
yards upwind of our school.
That's the field that
they were spraying.
And we can actually
feel the mist.
I contacted Syngenta
and said, we
believe that drift is occurring.
During PE a cloud of
gases came over them,
and kids just started dropping.
There was chaos on campuses.
It was horrific.
There wasn't enough
room in the health room.
About 140 children were
seeking assistance.
There was this effort by
administrators and politicians
to whitewash it over.
And immediately
in the newspaper,
you know, school evacuated
because of stink weed.
And that became the
species explanation,
that became the story.
Teachers came
together and stood up.
Stop poisoning our children.
>> Monsanto, Dow, Dupont
in Hawaii and elsewhere,
they've got a blank check
to experiment with any kind
of chemical they want
on these test plots.
You've got the most
toxic insecticide
virtually unregulated by the
US Department of Agriculture.
>> The seed companies,
the chemical companies,
especially Monsanto, use every
means of control to manipulate
our government and
other governments.
They pour huge amounts of
money into political campaigns.
They pour huge amounts
of money into lobbying.
They have many of
their own people
embedded in the key
decision-making roles
in the US government.
>> In 1992, the approval of
genetically engineered crops
was done by Michael Taylor,
who was a lawyer for Monsanto
and went right from Monsanto
working for the government.
Tom Vilsack, who was named
the Biotechnology Industrial
Organization's
Governor of the Year,
his law firm defended
Monsanto in the Supreme Court.
And he became a
Secretary of Agriculture.
Here you have somebody's who's
control of agricultural policy,
absolutely linked to the hip
to the biotechnology industry
and to Monsanto's interests.
The revolving door between
Monsanto and government
is going so fast,
it's almost dizzying.
>> The corporations, they said,
we want to really own these
seeds.
We want patents on life.
It was fast tracked
to the Supreme Court.
It was a 5-4 decision
with Clarence Thomas.
Then that lead of the 5 saying,
yes, you can patent seeds.
You can patent life.
Very few people know
what Clarence Thomas
was a Monsanto lawyer.
>> When I first heard about the
idea of patenting a seed or any
kind of plant, I was
absolutely horrified.
And I thought surely that
will never be allowed.
You can't own nature.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Under Section 101
of the Patent Act,
which defines what can be
patented in the United States,
you can only patent a
machine, a manufacture,
or an inventor's
composition of matter.
And I fail to see how a
seed can be either of those.
Monsanto takes one gene out
of tens of thousands of genes,
changes that, and says, no,
no, now we own the whole plant.
It's one of most extraordinary
giveaways giving corporations
the natural reproduction
of all life forms saying,
you can make a profit on every
one of those reproductions.
So they don't just on the seeds.
They own all of the
offspring of those seeds
and patent them forever.
>> The threat is there by
conglomerates to patent
our seeds, legally
saying they own it
because they're the
first to patent it.
We're the custodians of
this knowledge in the corn.
And how dare others
take it away.
>> Once these corns
get contaminated,
there's no way you
can breed it out.
The only safe thing to do
is actually incinerate.
You know, I wouldn't
feed it to animals.
I wouldn't compost it,
because it's in the DNA.
It's an abuse to seed and
to us as indigenous people.
>> With the GMO seeds
that are out there,
we need to protect our seeds.
We need to save our seeds.
And we need to plant them for
the survival of our communities
and survival of Earth Mom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our people know that where
there is wild rice there
Anishnabe.
It is our most sacred food.
We have harvested this rice
for thousands of years.
This wild rice doesn't grow
anywhere else in the world.
We've engaged in a battle
with the corporations
and with the University
of Minnesota.
The University of Minnesota
wanted to genetically engineer
wild rice.
We were very concerned
that that would potentially
contaminate our wild rice.
So we fought them.
The first opposition witness
out of the gate for three years
in a row was Monsanto.
They came out every
time we testified
and they said that
if the Ojibwe were
able to stop the genetic
engineering of wild rice,
it would send a chilling
message to the biotech industry.
When they go in, they take the
dignity of that food from you
and turn it into something
else, it is offensive.
It hurts our people.
It hurts us economically.
And it hurts us spiritually.
Wild should mean something.
And I would assume that that
would mean not genetically
engineered.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Genetically modified plants,
it's doing something which
isn't natural in
the plant world.
Genes from a completely
different species
are being introduced
into these plants.
And the plant fights.
The plant is not happy to
receive an alien species.
>> You can put a pig in
a room with a tomato.
And you can turn the lights down
low and play some nice music
and serve some wine.
But no matter how
hard you try, you're
not going to get the pig
to mate with a tomato.
But the genetic engineers
can take genes from the pig
and force it into the tomato.
They've taken genes from
spiders and put it into goats.
They've taken human genes and
put it into rice and corn.
They're eliminating the
natural species barriers
and in a sense playing god.
>> You shoot gold
particles laden with genes.
It's a very unreliable process.
So you also have to add
antibiotic resistance markers.
You also have to
add viral promoters
and every genetically
engineered seed
is a bundle of bacteria,
toxins, viral promoters.
As we remove the
barriers between species,
mixing these genes and
viruses, the threshold
also gets broken for the spread
of new infectious diseases.
>> A genetically modified seed
is the sorcerer's apprentice.
We have the capacity to
start all this stuff.
But we don't have the
capacity to stop it.
And when we manipulate a
species as a kind of hubris
that we will pay for.
>> You can't see the difference
between genetically engineered
corn and non-genetically
engineered corn.
This is not seeable
by a consumer.
Independent scientists were
beginning to see indications
that consuming genetically
engineered foods could
have kidney and liver damage.
We're seeing possible
reproductive issues
in laboratory animals.
These are peer-reviewed science.
Now, we're beginning
to see problems
that could come from them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Wheat was the holy grail
for companies like Monsanto.
If they could have had all
the wheat in the United States
be genetically engineered,
that was really the holy grail.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Monsanto had spent 10 years
developing the genetic modified
wheat.
Wheat farmers
decided, we did not
want them to release a
genetically modified wheat.
We said, no, we're
not doing that.
We don't have to take
the chance to fool
with the genetic
modified plants.
And we said, no,
we don't want it.
And now, we've got it.
>> We thought this
had been put to bed.
We thought those wheat
seeds had been destroyed.
Apparently not.
>> The Department of Agriculture
have told us, don't worry,
we can keep these
seed trials confined.
And time and time again,
they have failed to do so.
And they have escaped.
>> Once you take that
stuff out of laboratory,
there's 1,000 things that can go
wrong that let's that seed get
away.
>> As far as a duck can fly,
they eat seed and they excrete
that seed.
And that seed grows in a place
where it wasn't intended.
You can't pull it back.
You can't put the
toothpaste back in the tube.
>> International wheat
markets shut down for months.
That cost farmers hundreds
of millions of dollars.
The USDA opened
an investigation.
They've never been
able to discover
how the genetically
engineered wheat got
in the farmer's field.
>> We're fooling with mother
nature in a way that quite
frankly may end up not being
near as rosy of a panacea
as these seed companies
want to point out.
If our wheat is contaminated,
I'm out of business.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In 1998, we were just
beginning a harvest in canola
in the middle of August.
My neighbor had
grown GMO canola.
And our fields
were contaminated.
And a bus station phoned up.
And I thought that's unusual.
And they said, there's
a parcel here for you.
Later on that evening, open it.
Here, it's a lawsuit
from Monsanto.
And I didn't think much of it.
Well, what's this
patent infringement.
I didn't even know
what that was.
Our family lawyer
looked at me, he says,
Chrissy, I think
you're in trouble.
I said, what for?
He said, they're charging you
that you have their GMO seeds.
And I said, what are GMO seeds?
The judge stated
that it does not
matter how you're contaminated.
You violate the patent.
And you no longer own your seed.
That right should never be
taken away from a farmer.
You're taking seed that has been
there for thousands of years
and put a patent on
it and say you own it,
basically it's robbery.
To me, that's a really a
violation of human rights.
>> Henry Kissinger said if
you want to control a country,
control the oil.
If you want to control
people, control the food.
Vandana Shiva says if you
want to control the food,
control the seed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When seeds start to become
a patented property sold
by corporations, you
destroy seed freedom.
When a company as powerful
as Monsanto enters a country,
it starts to control that
country's decision making.
Monsanto started to buy
up Indian seed companies.
16 Indian seed companies can
only sell Monsanto seeds.
The companies will take video
lands into the villages.
They had every Indian epic.
And they would very
cleverly sell the seeds.
So Hanuman is carrying white
gold, the seeds of Monsanto.
So when Hanuman comes as
a salesman of Monsanto,
they believe in them.
So that was the first tract
through which they took over.
Then they also told
the farmer, why
are you using these old seeds?
Sell them to us.
A farmer has always had seed.
And a farmer would say,
oh, they're giving me
some money for the seed.
I'll just get it from
my neighbor tomorrow,
not realizing the
neighbor has also
been approached in the same
way and the next village
and the next village
in one season.
This thing they called
seed replacement
has destroyed the entire
native seed supply.
You have a seed
dictatorship established.
Then the farmer can't get out.
Farmers will be forced to come
back to buy seed every year.
We could have very,
very large scale famine.
But unlike all
famines of the past,
no resurrection, because
every famine of the past,
seed was always there.
This time's famine will
be based on a seed famine.
What this free trade
system has given
us is instead of seed
being of the farmers
by the farmers for the
farmers and all citizens,
it is now seed for
the corporations
by the incorporation
of the corporations.
>> NAFTA will create the
world's largest free trade zone
and create 200,000
jobs in this country.
>> When NAFTA was introduced
between the United States
and Mexico, all of a sudden, the
US was selling subsidized corn
into Mexico that was below the
cost of production in Mexico,
forcing a couple of million
farmers off their land.
We planted the seeds
of that migration.
>> A lot of that corn is
contaminated with transgenics.
We are destroying the basis
of the world's agriculture.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Oaxaca is a region of Mexico
where subsistence agriculture
holds on.
The subsistence agriculture
is slowly being phased out.
But if that
agriculture is gone, we
have lost that resources
for our future.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[SINGING]
[BELLS TOLLING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have lost 270,000
farmers to suicide.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Pioneer, DuPont,
and Dow Chemical,
they have all that
acreage leased,
all the way up
from the mountains,
all the way down to the ocean.
And this is where all the
experimentation goes on.
This is the dust that's
blowing in the fields.
It blows over the cliff
and into our homes.
And we breathe this stuff.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The neighborhood is filled
with people who have passed
away of some form of cancer.
So many people back
here have died.
My wife, she got breast cancer.
She almost died.
We just couldn't
gamble with her life.
She had to leave.
Then, I started getting
worse and worse.
I would gasp for air.
If I stay here much
longer, I might die.
I have to move.
I'm getting weaker and
weaker, and I can feel it.
That's the warning sign for me.
>> These chemical corporations
occupy lands that are
considered very sacred
to native Hawaiians.
Our land, our aina,
and everything that
comes from it,
that's our ancestor.
As a native Hawaiian, it's--
well, it's a disgrace
to our culture.
There really will be nothing
left for our children
if no one is
willing to speak up.
>> Future of Hawaii
is all at stake.
Everything I love
is being threatened.
[CHANTING]
>> I'm fighting for
the whole island.
Say something or die.
6,000 people, they're out
of love of their heart,
for our children, for
our land, for our ocean.
>> I met with the
chemical companies.
They would say, no, we're not
experimenting with pesticides.
And they tell me, this is safe.
There's nothing wrong
with this stuff.
Can you tell me what
you're spraying?
And they refuse to tell me.
Then the more these
companies would lie to me,
I had to do something.
And that's when we started
piecing bill 2491 together
to get disclosure.
>> Could any of you disclose
to me the amount of general use
pesticides that you
use on an annual basis?
With all due respect, I
asked you an hour ago,
if you would tell me today how
much general use pesticides
you're using.
And you said no
with your silence.
>> I would say that I don't
think I would want to comply
with the bill as is.
>> My second son here,
Pa'akatanao was born with
an extremely rare heart defect.
But because our son
was dying, his heart
unable to pump his own
blood through his body,
and endured nine surgeries
during those months.
All I know is that
while pregnant,
I took every precaution to grow
a healthy baby inside of me.
By not passing this
bill, you're telling me
I don't have the right to know.
If I had known, I would have
chosen not to expose my unborn
child as I innocently work day
in and day out in Kai'kaha.
>> If I seem a little emotional
it's because really hits home
to me.
Speaking on behalf
of unborn son,
my son has a condition
called gastroschisis,
basically the stomach
is on the outside.
I don't blame anybody
body, but I just
want to stop the poisoning.
Bringing a baby
into a world that's
got to cut open right here.
Consider this, that something
might be wrong on this island.
OK?
Something might be wrong.
Children don't deserve this.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The trust is gone
for these companies.
The trust is gone.
And I don't know
how they're going
to gain the trust that
other than backing this bill
and working with
the communities,
you know what I mean?
And, you know, like
I said before, it's
time to put human health
over corporate wealth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> They are suing the county
of Kauai for the right to spray
poisons next to schools.
And these are the largest
companies in the world.
So we're going to
have a huge battle.
>> OMG, GMO, People
have a right to know.
OMG GMO People have
a right to know.
OMG GMO--
>> This is a historic battle.
They're fighting for a profit.
We're fighting for our lives.
And those who fight for
their lives, do not give up.
Do not let down.
Never say no!
>> No one said, give me GM food.
Anyway, this has never been
voted for by any community
anywhere in the world.
The reason Americans
are being condemned
to eat GM food is they've
been denied the right to know.
[MARCHING BAND MUSIC]
>> 64 countries around the world
have some sort form of labeling
of genetically engineered foods.
United States does not.
Monsanto and the
other companies are
so frightened of labeling
because once people have
a choice, why would they choose
a product that only offers them
risks and no benefits.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I started Navdanya in 1987.
I named it Navdanya,
which means nine seeds,
but it also means the new gift.
>> Well, look at the
birds going above you.
>> I took inspiration
from Gandhi.
Gandhi had dealt with
the smaller imperialism
of the British by taking
on the spinning wheel.
And he said, we will be free,
we will spin our own cloth.
And I said, we will
save our own seed.
The seed will be the
spinning wheel of our times.
>> I heard these companies
talking about patenting seed
and genetically modified--
>> We will refuse to obey laws
that force us to accept GMOs
and patents.
>> We have a launched a campaign
this year for a global alliance
for seed freedom.
>> We need to protect
the diversity, integrity,
and freedom of life.
Give seed its own freedom,
so that we as humans
can have our freedom.
And the work we do
through Navdanya
is to encourage farmers to
grow enough for themselves,
to bring respect back
for their own seed,
for their own farming.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Our community seed banks are
both the networks of farmers
as well as the distribution
network for moving seed
wherever it's needed.
More than 110 community
seed banks have started.
If there's a drought, getting
drought-resistant seed.
If there's a flood, getting
flood-resistant seed.
So these are seeds of hope.
These are seeds that can
do not lock you into debt.
And we're training the young
people to spread seed saving,
because their freedom
is tied up to our duty
to the planet and our
duty to the future.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> For the farmer, we're going
to honor the land and make it
beautiful.
And you can only make it
beautiful through biodiversity.
And only when we have
the seeds of biodiversity
will the landscape be beautiful.
[APPLAUSE]
[CHEERS]
>> You know there's that Garth
Brooks song, "The Rodeo."
Well, for me, the rodeo is
going out into the wilderness
and finding things to eat.
It's like an obsession
that never ends,
a big, huge treasure hunt.
When people say, how do
we feed a hungry world,
what about the wild things?
>> We don't want to get the sap.
>> Holy moley.
This is a male plant.
So this baby is
pollinating somebody else.
Let's see who it's pollinating.
Look at 'em!
Look at the little nara melons.
Look at them.
I've never seen them before.
>> I've been waiting to get
these seeds for probably 15
years.
And you would not
imagine that this
would grow out in the desert.
If we get just a few of these
growing in a few places,
it won't be but a
couple of years,
and the people
themselves will be
able to start growing their own.
So a seed in this case
is extremely precious.
And what does that mean,
it's worth as much as gold?
>> You get up there and rub.
I'm going to hold this tight.
You get up there and rub.
>> You let the wind catch it.
>> OK, here, we're
getting them out.
OK, good.
>> Acanthosicyos naudinianus,
it's called the gemsbok
cucumber.
And these are one of the
treasures of the desert.
It should be edible.
Now, if they're
green, what I've heard
is they're going to burn
the crap out of your mouth.
You're going to
try the first one?
Do we have a spoon?
>> Oh, look at that.
>> OK.
Sweet?
>> What's it taste like?
>> It tastes terrible.
>> Does it taste bad?
>> Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So they're cooking them.
That gets rid of
the hotness in it.
Oh, you got to poke a hole in
them so they don't explode.
Look at that.
>> They're the original
botanists, aren't they?
I'm nothing.
All I am doing is
learning it in books
and wanting to
find out about it.
But they are knowing
everything about it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That's bigger than
he said probably.
It's a group effort
digging up this monster.
>> Unbelievable.
>> That's incredible.
[CHEERING]
>> This is the
incredible marama bean.
It produces tubers
up to 500 pounds.
>> About 10 pounds?
>> It is a future potential
food crop unlike any other
on the planet.
>> And how many other beans
do you know produce a giant,
giant sweet potato?
How many others produce a giant,
cashew, macadamia size nut?
This is an amazing plant.
>> The people in the Kalahari
depend upon this for their very
survival.
It doesn't need water
for three years,
and it can still survive.
You can go back eons and be
like a hunter walking out here
when he was just surviving
with the elements.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Strange thing to
get impressed with,
but I'm impressed.
We do have a beautiful world.
And something like
this to me, it's
just a marvel of the
planet we live on.
[SINGING]
>> I DON'T suppose anyone's up
for the Merry Dwarfs, probably?
>> I suppose.
>> I don't know.
>> There's enough of us.
>> I don't know OK.
Hi, ho, cried the merry dwarfs.
And then bump, bump.
That's critical.
The timing is all important.
It's like with seed saving.
Time is a big deal.
Ready?
Let's hear it now.
>> Hi ho, cried
the merry dwarfs.
Dump, dump.
It's off to the woods,
we-- bump-- are--
we'd like to stay the time is
short, Hi ho the merry dwarfs.
>> The time is short.
Hi ho, cried the merry dwarfs.
>> Magnificent.
Magnificent.
That was it.
You did it right off like that.
Woo.
OK.
>> Saving seeds is a gas.
Seed saving is all about sex.
And humans are all obsessed with
sex, even if it's rutabaga sex.
We can hire someone to
come fix your plumbing.
I'm sure-- we know for a
fact you can hire someone
to make love to your
spouse, for example.
And they'll sure as hell do
a better job than you will.
But, no, somehow we
feel like, no, I really
want to do that myself.
Some things are
just too important.
This is right up there with
making love to your spouse.
>> So this is the office
where all my stuff is stored.
I don't know quite how
many thousands of varieties
samples of seeds are here.
So this is a horrible mess.
This is about as
good as it gets here.
I live in chaos.
And this room is on of the more
chaotic parts of the house.
All these boxes on top are
all waiting to get refiled.
>> And I think I put away.
>> I never can
seem to get enough.
I've tried to level off in
recent years to something
that I can handle.
>> Rutabagas, over here.
>> Sometimes thought that if
the house were to catch on fire
and I had to do something
very, very quickly,
hopefully I would first make
sure that all the family were
safely out.
But somehow deep inside I am
afraid that I would probably
rush in here, smash
out the windows,
and start throwing boxes of
seeds out to the firefighters,
and hope they understood
what to do with them.
Didn't turn their hoses
on them or something.
>> I sweat a lot over
the things that I lose.
No one in the future
can save them.
They'll already be lost.
I see no end in sight
except when I'm cremated.
That concerns me sometimes--
who will take this over.
[FROG CROAKING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Jack and the Beanstalk
is a true story.
The idea we all laughed
at that he would trade
his pig or his cow or whatever
for a handful of beans
is like, what a
silly thing is that?
But if you think
about the potential
of the self-replicating
system that's in your hand
and what it could
potentially produce,
we should all
trade in everything
we have for a handful of beans.
One of our fairy
tales is actually
trying to teach us something
that's unbelievably important.
[GRUMBLING]
[CHOPPING]
[ROARING]
[CRASHING]
>> I woke up one night about
3 o'clock in the morning.
I sat up straight on my bed.
And I went seed school.
We got to teach this stuff.
We gotta open up a
space and teach them
what we know to having this
resilient fabric again.
I'm going back to the 10,000
year old way of doing it.
To have everybody everywhere
saving and storing and sharing
their own seeds regionally, the
way it always has been done.
>> When we teach about seeds,
we rewrite ourselves back
into that evolutionary dance
between plants and humans.
We initiate a whole
new generation
of people who care for life.
Since the seed's asking
to be spoken for again.
As a Mohawk woman, seeds
embody this sense of hope
for the future that we could
create something different,
a new paradigm for our children.
We have to make that
promise to the corn
that we will nourish
ourselves from it,
but we will also give back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All these seeds they are
going to move to his new house.
We have the-- how we say, the
blessing of the Great Spirit,
the Mother Earth,
all the protectors
and the spirit from this land.
And they say, you guys, they
have to finish the seed bank.
>> We beginning to make
an impact in our Pueblo,
in our community.
Stone by stone or mud by
mud, we have this building.
All these seeds
they have memory.
They happy in this moment.
The seed bank represent life.
[SINGING]
>> Those young men and women
are carrying on a tradition
of our community.
And I see the young people
happy and the corn is happy.
The birds are happy.
Because that's who we are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We grow a really
great variety of squash.
Archaeologists dug down
and they came upon a clay
ball that was about this big.
And in that clay
ball, they shook
it and they heard something.
They cracked it open.
And it was a squash seed.
The carbon dated
it 800 years old.
And I always laugh
because I always
say white guys get to
name things all the time.
So I'm going to name this one.
And I call it
Gete-Okosomin, which
means really cool old squash.
>> It's time for us to
take back that manna.
It's so important to get
back to our food source.
Take back that ability
to self-sustain
as our ancestors once did.
>> This food forest here
could feed hundreds of people.
We could be the self-sustainable
epicenter of the world.
And there's no
reason we can't be.
We can grow any fruit or
vegetable on these islands.
We planted 21
banana trees today.
As a team, as a family,
can accomplish anything.
>> And we went from this much
diversity that took 10,000
years to create down to this
pinch with only 4% left.
And we're right here.
Right?
And so we're waking up.
We're going to do this.
It's knowing that in
each individual seed
is the potential to
change it all back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) In the heart of
the seed there's a story waiting
to be born.
Our grandmother's
breeding, our grandfather's
breeding into the ancient corn.
In the heart of the seed,
there's a story to read.
there's a whole tribe to feed.
Our seed savers know it.
Our farmers grow it.
And form the seed we are born.
Mother Nature is essential
for ascension for the light.
Granulations are essential
for ascension in our life.
Co-creation from our being is
essential for us to thrive.
Participation from all nations
is essential for our tribe,
for our tribe.
Pollination is essential
for ascension for the light.
Granulations are essential
for ascension in our life.
Co-creation form all beings
is essential for us to thrive.
Participation from all nations
is essential for our tribe,
for our tribe.